Callr task queue in 100 lines of code (#327)
tidyverse/tidyverse.org: content/articles/2019-08-callr-task-q.Rmd

---
title: Multi Process Task Queue in 100 Lines of R Code
slug: callr-task-q
author: Gábor Csárdi
date: '2019-08-03'
description: >
  We use `callr::r_session` to implement a worker pool and task queue in
  100 lines of R code.
categories:

> - programming

Reviewer: Are these existing categories? I think I'd prefer something like "deep-dive" for this sort of post.

Author: "programming" is, I'll use "deep-dive" instead of "parallelism". It will be a new category, I'll try to find some fitting icon for it.

- parallelism
photo:
  url: https://unsplash.com/photos/cDwZ40Lj9eo
  author: Davide Ragusa
---

```{r setup, include = FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  collapse = TRUE, comment = "#>"
)
```

```{r, comment="", results="asis", echo = FALSE}
if (knitr::opts_knit$get("rmarkdown.pandoc.to") == "html") {
  old.hooks <- fansi::set_knit_hooks(knitr::knit_hooks)
  options(crayon.enabled = TRUE)
  options(crayon.colors = 256)
  invisible(crayon::num_colors(forget = TRUE))
}
```

## Introduction

```{r echo = FALSE}
source("figure/taskq.R")
```

This post is a demo of `callr::r_session`, a persistent R session you can
use to run R code asynchronously. I set out to build a task queue, which

> runs tasks in subprocesses, concurrently, in mere 100 lines of R code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
runs tasks in subprocesses, concurrently, in a mere 100 lines of R code.
```

Here is a short teaser for how the queue will work. `task_q$new()` creates
a new R6 object, which represents the queue. Its `push()` method adds a

> task, which is a function and its arguments, similarly to `callr::r()`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
task, which is a function and its arguments, similar to `callr::r()`.
```

The `pop()` method gets the results of the first task that has finished.
`pop()` has a timeout argument, which lets you wait for a task to finish,
if all pushed tasks are still running. It returns `NULL` if no task has
finished before the timeout was over. The timeout can be `0` or `Inf`,
meaning no wait at all, or wait indefinitely. The default timeout is `0`.

```{r}
q <- task_q$new()
q$push(function() { Sys.getpid() })
q$push(function() { Sys.sleep(.5); Sys.getpid() })
q$pop()
```

This `pop()` call returned `NULL`, as none of the tasks are done yet.
Even though running `Sys.getpid()` is fast, the worker processes also need
200-500 ms time start up, when the queue is created. If you are willing to
wait a bit, at least one task should be done in less than half a second,
but usually not the second one yet:

```{r}
sec <- as.difftime(1, units = "secs")

> q$pop(sec * 1/2)$result

Reviewer: Can you not just supply an integer here? I think the use of difftime is a bit of a distraction

q$pop()
```

The `poll()` method checks for finished tasks without removing their
results from the queue. It also has a timeout parameter, which works the
same way as `pop()`'s timeout. `poll()` returns the identifiers of all
tasks that are done.

```{r}
q$poll(Inf)
q$pop()$result
```

> If the queue is empty, i.e. not tasks are running and no tasks are waiting,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the queue is empty, i.e. no tasks are running and no tasks are waiting,
```

then `pop()` always returns `NULL`, immediately, because there is nothing
to wait for:

```{r}
q$pop()
```

## API design

The task queue will be an R6 class, with `push()`, `pop()`, `poll()`
methods like above, and some other query methods:

```r
task_q <- R6::R6Class(
  "task_q",
  public = list(

>     initialize      = function(concurrency = 4L) { },

Reviewer: Maybe `num_workers` ?

    get_num_waiting = function() { },
    get_num_running = function() { },
    get_num_done    = function() { },
    is_idle         = function() { },
    list_tasks      = function() { },

    push = function(fun, args = list(), id = NULL) { },
    poll = function(timeout = 0) { },
    pop = function(timeout = 0) { }
  )
)
```

`initialize()` has an argument to set the number of workers. The size of
the worker pool remains fixed for the lifetime of the queue.

The `get_num_*()` methods return the number of waiting, running and
completed tasks. `get_num_done()` includes tasks that haven't been
`pop()`-d yet. Once a task is `pop()`-d, it is removed completely from the
queue.

`is_idle()` returns `TRUE` if the queue does not have any tasks (in any
state). `list_tasks()` returns a data frame (tibble) with data about the
tasks. This is especially useful for debugging.

`push()` adds a task to the queue. `poll()` returns the ids of all tasks
that are done. `pop()` returns the result of the oldest task that is done.

## Data structure

> Before writing the methods, I'll need to design the data structure to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before writing the methods, I'll design the data structure that will
```

store all information about the tasks and the worker processes. The
standard data structure for a list of records is a data frame in R.

> Perhaps for many the first choice would be to keep a data frame for the

Reviewer: Something isn't quite right with the paragraph structure here.

#> 7 .idle-2 TRUE  waiting <NULL> <NULL>     <NULL>     <NULL>
#> 8 .idle-3 TRUE  waiting <NULL> <NULL>     <NULL>     <NULL>
#> 9 .idle-4 TRUE  waiting <NULL> <NULL>     <NULL>     <NULL>
```

The columns are:

* `id`: a character id, which can be user-supplied or auto-assigned (if the
  user did not supply it). This is useful to identify tasks.
* `idle`: a logical flag, whether this is a dummy idle task or not.
* `state`: current state of the task. More about this shortly.
* `fun`: the function the task needs to run. This is a list column.
* `args`: arguments to pass to the function. This is a list itself,
  so the column is a list column.
* `worker`: the `callr::r_session` object, the R session that is running
  the task, or `NULL` if the task is not running.
* `result`: another list column, the result of the run, if the task is
  already done, `NULL` otherwise.

The possible task states are: _waiting_, _running_, _ready_ and _done_.
The first two are not very surprising. The distinction between the
last two is somewhat technical. A task is _ready_ if the background R
session has finished running it. The queue hasn't read out its result yet,

> and the R session is still assigned to it. (I.e. the task's `worker` column

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the R session is still assigned to it (i.e. the task's `worker` column
```

assigns a worker to an idle task, the task will immediately go into the
_ready_ state, since the queue is immediately allowed to re-assign the
worker, should a real task be _waiting_.

However, when a worker is starting up, its idle task is _running_, until
their background R process has started up. After this initial _running_
state the idle tasks are always either _waiting_ or _ready_.

## Implementation

I am ready to start the implementation now. I'll focus on the individual
methods here, and show the complete code of the R6 class at the end.
Let's start with the internal data. `tasks` contains the task data frame,
`initialize()` will create it. `next_id` and `get_next_id` will provide
us unique task ids. I prefix these with a dot, to increase the probability
that they won't interfere with user supplied task ids. So they'll
be `".1"`, `".2"`, etc.

```r
  private = list(
    tasks = NULL,
    next_id = 1L,
    get_next_id = function() {
      id <- private$next_id
      private$next_id <- id + 1L
      paste0(".", id)
    }
  )
```

The `initialize()` method will just defer the work to a private method and

> return the object itself. Returning `self` is usually good practice and

Reviewer: I think you could drop the discussion of `invisible(self)` here; it's a bit of a distraction.

> allows method chaining, although most `task_q` method do not return `self`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
allows method chaining, although most `task_q` methods do not return `self`,
```

limiting this considerably.

```r
    initialize = function(concurrency = 4L) {
      private$start_workers(concurrency)
      invisible(self)
    }
```

The private `start_workers()` method that actually starts the
workers and creates the `tasks` data frame:

```r
    start_workers = function(concurrency) {
      private$tasks <- tibble::tibble(
        id = character(), idle = logical(),
        state = c("waiting", "running", "ready", "done")[NULL],
        fun = list(), args = list(), worker = list(), result = list())
      for (i in seq_len(concurrency)) {
        rs <- callr::r_session$new(wait = FALSE)
        private$tasks <- tibble::add_row(private$tasks,
          id = paste0(".idle-", i), idle = TRUE, state = "running",
          fun = list(NULL), args = list(NULL), worker = list(rs),
          result = list(NULL))
      }
    }
```

> The starting values of the empty task data frame are mostly straightforward.

Reviewer: I _think_ I'd prefer indexing with `0`

All tasks that returned `"ready"` are indeed set to the _ready_ state.
After this `poll()` calls `schedule()` to read out the results of the
_ready_ tasks and reassign their workers to _waiting_ ones.

`poll()` returns the ids of all tasks that are _done_.

This version of `poll()` has a small issue when the R sessions are starting
up: it might return without any results, before the specified timeout
value is over. At startup the idle tasks are _running,_ and they are
polled by `processx::poll()`. If any of the R sessions start up before the
timeout is over, `processx::poll()` returns with `"ready"` for them.
But `schedule()` cannot mark these tasks as _done_, because they are idle
tasks, they'll be _waiting_, and with no task _done_, `poll()`
will return an empty vector. This is problematic, because `poll()`
promises to either wait until the specified timeout _or_ return a task
that is _done_. So we need to wrap the simplified `poll()` into a loop, and
keep calling `processx::poll()` until either the timeout
expires or a task is _done_. The final `poll()` looks like this:

```r
    poll = function(timeout = 0) {
      limit <- Sys.time() + timeout
      as_ms <- function(x)

>         if (x==Inf) -1 else as.integer(as.double(x, "secs") * 1000)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        if (x == Inf) -1 else as.integer(as.double(x, "secs") * 1000)
```

      repeat{
        topoll <- which(private$tasks$state == "running")
        conns <- lapply(
          private$tasks$worker[topoll],
          function(x) x$get_poll_connection())
        pr <- processx::poll(conns, as_ms(timeout))
        private$tasks$state[topoll][pr == "ready"] <- "ready"
        private$schedule()
        ret <- private$tasks$id[private$tasks$state == "done"]
        if (is.finite(timeout)) timeout <- limit - Sys.time()
        if (length(ret) || timeout < 0) break;
      }
      ret
    }
```

> Unfortunately `processx::poll()` expects the timeout as an integer in

Reviewer: As above, I think you should just pass number of milliseconds directly in order to focus more on the interesting details.

milliseconds, not as a `difftime` object, hence the somewhat tedious time
unit conversions.

Only the private `schedule()` method is missing now:

```r
    schedule = function() {
      ready <- which(private$tasks$state == "ready")
      if (!length(ready)) return()
      rss <- private$tasks$worker[ready]

      private$tasks$result[ready] <- lapply(rss, function(x) x$read())
      private$tasks$worker[ready] <- replicate(length(ready), NULL)
      private$tasks$state[ready] <-
        ifelse(private$tasks$idle[ready], "waiting", "done")

      waiting <- which(private$tasks$state == "waiting")[1:length(ready)]
      private$tasks$worker[waiting] <- rss
      private$tasks$state[waiting] <-
        ifelse(private$tasks$idle[waiting], "ready", "running")
      lapply(waiting, function(i) {
        if (! private$tasks$idle[i]) {
          private$tasks$worker[[i]]$call(private$tasks$fun[[i]],
                                         private$tasks$args[[i]])
        }
      })
    }
```

> `schedule()`'s job is to perform the _ready_ to _done_` and the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`schedule()`'s job is to perform the _ready_ to _done_ and the
```
